docs: v0.5.0 blog post (#1227)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: site-src/blog/2022/first-beta.md

> ---

Reviewer: Our blog system is remarkably manual at this point, so we'll also need additions to https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/master/site-src/blog/index.md and https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/master/mkdocs.yml#L69 for this to fit in.

Author: Sounds good, done in 82421d13bd444b49980d66e8db97824026d5d053

description: >
  We're pleased to announce the start of beta releases for the Gateway API
  project with the release of version `v0.5.0`. This release includes `v1beta1`
  versions of `GatewayClass`, `Gateway` and `HTTPRoute` as well as several other
  significant improvements which this post will cover some of the highlights of.
---

# Introducing Gateway API v1beta1

<small style="position:relative; top:-30px;">

>   :octicons-calendar-24: June 22, 2022 ·

Author: Reminder to myself to keep this up to date prior to merging.

  :octicons-clock-24: 5 min read
</small>

> We're pleased to announce the start of beta releases for the Gateway API
> project with the release of version `v0.5.0`. This release includes `v1beta1`
> versions of `GatewayClass`, `Gateway` and `HTTPRoute` as well as several other
> significant improvements which this post will cover some of the highlights of.

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is better, but I think some tweaks would be good here since the opening paragraph seems so important for these kinds of posts.

```suggestion
We're pleased to announce that key Gateway API resources are graduating to
beta with the `v0.5.0` release of the API. In addition to `GatewayClass`, `Gateway` 
and `HTTPRoute` graduating to beta, this release introduces several new concepts
to the API that we'll cover below.
```

## What is Gateway API

Gateway API is a collection of resources centered around `Gateway` resources
(which represent the underlying network gateways / proxy servers) to enable
robust Kubernetes service networking through expressive, extensible and
role-oriented interfaces that are implemented by many vendors and have broad
industry support.

Originally conceived as a successor to the well known `Ingress` API, the
benefits of Gateway API include (but are not limited to) explicit support for

> many commonly used networking protocols (e.g. `HTTP`, `GRPC`, `TCP`, `UDP`) as

Reviewer: Probably should leave off `GRPC` until it's in the API.
```suggestion
many commonly used networking protocols (e.g. `HTTP`, `TLS`, `TCP`, `UDP`) as
```

well as tightly integrated support for Transport Layer Security (TLS). The
`Gateway` resource in particular enables implementations to manage the lifecycle

> of network gateways as a native Kubernetes API (whereas previously these might
> have been managed somewhere else, like helm).

Reviewer: Maybe leave this part off as I think it might add some confusion.
```suggestion
of network gateways as a native Kubernetes API.
```

If you're an end-user interested in some of the benefits of Gateway API we
invite you to jump in and find an implementation that suits you. At the time of

> this release there are over a dozen implementations for popular API gateways and

Reviewer: Should probably link to our implementations page here.

Author: Done in 82421d13bd444b49980d66e8db97824026d5d053 :+1:

service meshes and guides are available to start exploring quickly.

> ### Getting Started

Reviewer: Somewhere in here I think we need to clarify that this API is built on CRDs. That means that anyone with a Kubernetes 1.16+ cluster can install the latest set of APIs and get up and running with it.

Reviewer: I think "Getting Started" probably fits best after "Release Highlights" and before "Next Steps"

Author: Sounds good, added in 82421d13bd444b49980d66e8db97824026d5d053

The Gateway API project itself is a Kubernetes API like `Ingress` and you can
think of the implementations of it as similar to the implementations for
`IngressClass` or `StorageClass` in that Kubernetes itself has no default
implementation of it (though your cluster provider might).

Take a look at our [API concepts documentation][concepts] and check out some of

> our [Guides][guides] to start familiarizing yourself with the APIs and how they

Reviewer: `guides` does not have a link definition anywhere.

Author: Thank you, fixed in 82421d13bd444b49980d66e8db97824026d5d053

you may already be familiar with or the one your cluster provider uses as a
default (if applicable).

If you're specifically interested in helping to contribute to Gateway API, we
would love to have you! Please feel free to [open a new issue][issue] on the
repository, or join in our [discussions][disc]. Also check out our [community
page][community] which includes links to our chatrooms and community meetings.

[concepts]:https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/api-overview/
[impl]:https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/implementations
[issue]:https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/new/choose
[disc]:https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/new
[community]:https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/contributing/community/

## Release Highlights

### Graduation to Beta

The `v0.5.0` release is particularly historic because it marks the growth in
maturity to a `v1beta1` release for some of our key APIs:

- `GatewayClass`
- `Gateway`
- `HTTPRoute`

This achievement was marked by the completion of several graduation criteria:

- over a dozen [implementations][impl]
- the first release of our conformance test suite

> - users/implementors have exercised most of the API surface

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- most of the API surface is actively being used
```

> - approval from Kubernetes SIG Networking maintainers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- approval from Kubernetes SIG Network API reviewers
```

channel, plus:

- `alpha` API resources
- un-graduated fields that are considered experimental

Release channels are used internally to enable iterative development with
quick turnaround, and externally to indicate feature stability to implementors
and end-users.

For this release we've added the following experimental features:

- [Route select Gateway listeners by port number](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/1002)
- [URL rewrites and path redirects](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/945)

[ch]:https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/versioning/#release-channels-eg-experimental-standard

## Other Improvements

For an exhaustive list of changes included in the `v0.5.0` release, please see
the [v0.5.0 CHANGELOG entry][changelog].

[changelog]:https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/master/CHANGELOG.md#v050

## Next Steps

As we continue to mature the API for production use cases, the following is a
(non-exhaustive) list of some of the highlights for upcoming releases:

- [GRPCRoute][gep1016] for [gRPC][grpc] traffic routing
- [route delegation][pr1085]
- Layer 4 API maturity: `v1beta1` for `TCPRoute`, `UDPRoute` and `TLSRoute`

> - Expanded support and coverage for service mesh use cases

Author: Sounds good, let me make that an explicit suggestion:

```suggestion
- Expanded support and coverage for service mesh use cases (to be discussed in Working Group Mesh)
```
